World-wide , trading was generally manageable .
The Frankfurt stock exchange was hardest hit of the major markets , with blue chips there falling 12.8 % .
In London , a midday rally left the market 's major index off 3.2 % , and Tokyo 's leading stock index fell only 1.8 % in surprisingly lackluster trading .
Other , more thinly traded Asian markets were hit harder than Tokyo 's , but there were no free-fall declines .
Investors big and small say they learned valuable lessons since the 1987 crash : In this age of computerized trading , huge corrections or runups in a few hours ' time must be expected .
What 's more , such short-term cataclysms are survivable and are no cause for panic selling .
Stephen Boesel , a major money manager for T. Rowe Price in Baltimore , says , `` There was less panic than in 1987 : We had been through it once . ''
In Somerset , Wis. , Adrian Sween , who owns a supplier of nursing-home equipment and is n't active in the stock market , agrees .
`` I look at it as a ho-hum matter , '' he says .
Many other factors played a part in yesterday 's comeback .
The Federal Reserve signaled its willingness to provide liquidity ; the interest rate on its loans to major banks inched downward early in the day .
Foreign stock markets , which kicked off Black Monday with a huge selling spree , began the day off by relatively modest amounts .
The dollar , after falling sharply in overnight trading to 139.10 yen , bounced back strongly to 141.8 , thus easing fears that foreigners would unload U.S. stocks .
And the widely disseminated opinion among most market experts that a crash was n't in store also helped calm investors .
Many major institutions , for example , came into work yesterday ready to buy some of the blue chips they felt had been sharply undervalued on Friday .
Still , amid all the backslapping and signs of relief over yesterday 's events , some market professionals cautioned that there is nothing present in the current market system to prevent another dizzying drop such as Friday 's .
`` There is too much complacency , '' says money manager Barry Schrager .
Computers have increasingly connected securities markets world-wide , so that a buying or selling wave in one market is often passed around the globe .
So investors everywhere nervously eyed yesterday 's opening in Tokyo , where the Nikkei average of 225 blue-chip stocks got off to a rocky start .
The average plunged some 600 points , or 1.7 % , in the first 20 minutes of trading .
But the selling wave had no conviction , and the market first surged upward by 200 points , then drifted lower , closing down 647 .
Unlike two years ago , most of Japan 's major investors chose to sit this calamity out .
In Merrill Lynch & Co. 's Tokyo trading room , some 40 traders and assistants sat quietly , with few orders to process .
Clients `` are all staying out '' of the market , one Merrill trader says .
The relative calm in Tokyo proved little comfort to markets opening up in Europe .
Frankfurt 's opening was delayed a half hour because of a crush of sell orders .
`` The beginning was chaotic , '' says Nigel Longley , a broker for Commerzbank
In London , the view from the trading floor of an American securities firm , Jefferies & Co. , also was troubling .
A computer screen displaying 100 blue-chip stocks colors each one red when its price is falling .
The screen was a sea of red .
`` I see concern , but I do n't see panic , '' says J. Francis Palamara , a New Yorker who runs the 15-trader office .
London 's blue-chip stock index turned up just before 8 a.m . New York time , sending an encouraging message to Wall Street .
When trading opened in New York at 9:30 a.m. EDT , stocks fell sharply -- as expected .
Futures markets in Chicago had opened at a level suggesting the Dow would fall by about 60 points .
With sell orders piled up from Friday , about half the stocks in the Dow could n't open on time .
By 9:45 , the industrial average had dropped 27 points .
By 10 a.m. , it was down 49 .
Ten minutes later , the Dow hit bottom - down 63.52 points , another 2.5 % .
But shortly before then , some of Wall Street 's sharpest traders say , they sensed a turn .
`` The first thing that caught my eye that was encouraging was Treasury bonds were off , '' says Austin George , head of stock trading at T. Rowe Price .
`` It meant that people were n't running pell-mell to the safety of bonds . ''
Shortly after 10 a.m. , the Major Market Index , a Chicago Board of Trade futures contract of 20 stocks designed to mimic the DJIA , exploded upward .
Stock traders were buoyed -- because an upturn in the MMI had also started the recovery in stocks on the Tuesday following Black Monday .
`` The MMI has gone better , '' shouted a trader in the London office of Shearson Lehman Hutton .
Shearson 's London trading room went wild .
Traders shouted out as their Reuters , Quotron and Telerate screens posted an ever-narrowing loss on Wall Street .
Then , nine minutes later , Wall Street suddenly rebounded to a gain on the day .
`` Rally , rally , rally , '' shouted Shearson 's Andy Rosen .
`` This is panic buying . ''
Major blue-chip stocks like Philip Morris , General Motors and Proctor & Gamble led the rally .
Japanese were said to be heavy buyers .
German and Dutch investors reportedly loaded up on Kellogg Co .
Then , traders say , corporations with share buy-back programs kicked into high gear , triggering gains in , among other issues , Alcan Aluminium and McDonald 's .
Walt Disney Co. , which had one of the biggest sell-order imbalances on Friday and was one of seven stocks that halted trading and never reopened that day , opened yesterday late at 114.5 , down 8.5 .
But then it suddenly burst upward 7.5 as Goldman , Sachs & Co. stepped in and bought almost every share offer , traders said .
By 10:25 , the Dow had turned up for the day , prompting cheers on trading desks and exchange floors .
Among Big Board specialists , the cry was `` Pull your offers '' -- meaning that specialists soon expected to get higher prices for their shares .
`` It was bedlam on the upside , '' said one Big Board specialist .
`` What we had was a real , old-fashioned rally . ''
This technical strength spurred buying from Wall Street 's `` black boxes , '' computer programs designed to trigger large stock purchases during bullish periods .
Typical , perhaps , was Batterymarch 's Dean LeBaron .
Mr. LeBaron , who manages $ 10 billion , says , `` We turned the trading system on , and it did whatever it was programmed to do . ''
Asked what stocks the computer bought , the money manager says , `` I do n't know . ''
Not everybody was making money .
The carnage on the Chicago Board Options Exchange , the nation 's major options market , was heavy after the trading in S&P 100 stock-index options was halted Friday .
Many market makers in the S&P 100 index options contract had bullish positions Friday , and when the shutdown came they were frozen with huge losses .
Over the weekend , clearing firms told the Chicago market makers to get out of their positions at any cost Monday morning .
`` They were absolutely killed , slaughtered , '' said one Chicago-based options trader .
Meanwhile , a test of the stock market 's rally came at about 2 p.m. , with the Dow at 2600 , up 31 points on the day .
Charles Clough , a strategist at Merrill Lynch , says bargain hunting had explained the Dow 's strength up to that point and that many market professionals were anticipating a drop in the Dow .
Moreover , the announcement that real estate magnate and sometime raider Donald Trump was withdrawing his offer for AMR Corp. might have been expected to rattle traders .
Instead , the rally only paused for about 25 minutes and then steamed forward as institutions resumed buying .
The market closed minutes after reaching its high for the day of
Across the country , many people took yesterday 's events in stride , while remaining generally uneasy about the stock market in general .
Says James Norman , the mayor of Ava , Mo. : `` I do n't invest in stocks .
I much prefer money I can put my hands on . ''
While Mayor Norman found the market 's performance Monday reassuring , he says , he remains uneasy .
`` We have half the experts saying one thing and half the other '' about the course of the economy .
Ralph Holzfaster , a farmer and farm-supply store operator in Ogallala , Neb. , says of the last few days events , `` If anything good comes out of this , it might be that it puts some of these LBOs on the skids . ''
Says Gordon Fines , a money manager at IDS Financial Services in Minneapolis , `` You 're on a roller coaster , and that may last .
The public is still cautious .
Skipper 's Inc. , Bellevue , Wash. , said it signed a definitive merger agreement for a National Pizza Corp. unit to acquire the 90.6 % of Skipper 's Inc. it does n't own for $ 11.50 a share , or about $ 28.1 million .
NP Acquisition Co. , a National Pizza unit , plans to begin a tender offer for Skipper 's on Friday , conditioned on at least two-thirds of Skipper 's shares being tendered .
Pittsburg , Kan.-based National Pizza said the transaction will be financed under its revolving credit agreement .
In national over-the-counter trading , Skipper 's shares rose 50 cents to $ 11 .
Skipper 's said the merger will help finance remodeling and future growth .
Skipper 's previously turned down a $ 10-a-share proposal from National Pizza and Pizza Hut Inc. questioned whether the purchase would violate National Pizza 's franchise agreements .
National Pizza said it settled its dispute with Pizza Hut , allowing it to make the purchase .
Also , Skipper 's results began to turn around , permitting a higher offer , National Pizza said .
For the 12 weeks ended Sept. 3 , Skipper 's had net income of $ 361,000 , or 13 cents a share , compared with a net loss a year earlier .
Revenue was $ 19.9 million .
EAST GERMANS RALLIED as officials reportedly sought Honecker 's ouster .
In what was considered the largest protest in the Communist state 's 40-year history , at least 120,000 demonstrators marched through the southern city of Leipzig to press demands for democratic freedoms , opposition activists said .
Police did n't intervene .
Meanwhile , as the first of more than 1,300 East Germans trying to flee to the West through Poland renounced their citizenship , a West German newspaper reported that regional Communist officials demanded the dismissal of hard-line leader Honecker .
Secretary of State Baker , in a foreign policy speech , called for the reunification of Germany , saying it was the `` legitimate right '' of the German people .
Gorbachev blamed the Soviet Union 's press for contributing to the nation 's mounting problems .
At a meeting Friday , the Kremlin leader complained about recent articles that raised the possiblity of civil unrest , and accused the media of fueling panic buying of goods by publishing stories about impending shortages .
House-Senate conferees approved a permanent smoking ban on domestic airline routes within the continental U.S. and on flights of less than six hours to Alaska and Hawaii .
The curbs would cover all but a small percentage of flights , and represent an expansion of the current ban on flights of less than two hours .
E. Robert Wallach was sentenced by a U.S. judge in New York to six years in prison and fined $ 250,000 for his racketeering conviction in the Wedtech scandal .
Wallach , an associate of ex-Attorney General Meese , was found guilty in August of taking $ 425,000 in illegal payoffs from the now-defunct defense contractor .
NASA resumed the countdown for today 's launch of the space shuttle Atlantis , and a federal appeals court in Washington dismissed a lawsuit by anti-nuclear groups to delay the flight because the plutonium-powered Galileo space probe was aboard .
The space agency said it did n't expect weather or protesters to block the liftoff .
The Bush administration is preparing to extend a ban on federal financing of research using fetal tissue , government sources said .
A temporary prohibition was imposed in March 1988 .
While anti-abortion groups are opposed to such research , scientists have said transplanting such tissue could be effective in treating diabetes .
Delegates from 91 nations endorsed a ban on world ivory trade in an attempt to rescue the endangered elephant from extinction .
Five African nations , however , said they would continue selling the valuable tusks .
Mubarak held reconciliation talks with Gadhafi at the Egyptian resort of Mersa Metruh .
It was the Libyan leader 's first trip to Egypt in 16 years .
They announced a reduction in formalities for travel , but did n't show any real signs of resuming full diplomatic ties .
The Egyptian president said he would visit Libya today to resume the talks .
Seoul and Pyongyang reached a tentative agreement to allow visits between families on the divided Korean peninsula .
Such family reunions would be the second since 1945 .
Differences remained between the North and South Korean governments , however , over conditions for the exchanges .
Freed black nationalists resumed political activity in South Africa and vowed to fight against apartheid , raising fears of a possible white backlash .
The nation 's main white opposition party warned that the government 's release Sunday of eight black political prisoners risked bringing chaos and eventual black Marxist rule to the nation .
The White House said Bush is `` fully satisfied '' with CIA Director Webster and the intelligence agency 's performance during the Oct. 3 failed coup in Panama .
The Washington Post reported that unidentified senior administration officials were frustrated with Webster 's low-profile activities during the insurrection and wanted him replaced .
Poland 's legislature approved limits on automatic wage increases without special provisions for food price rises .
The vote was considered a test of the Solidarity-led government 's resolve to proceed with a harsh economic-restructuring program .
Norway 's King Olav V installed a three-party non-Socialist government as Gro Harlem Brundtland 's three-year-old Labor regime relinquished power .
The 19-member cabinet is led by Prime Minister Jan Syse , who acknowledged a `` difficult situation '' since the coalition controls only 62 seats in Oslo 's 165-member legislature .
El Salvador 's government opened a new round of talks with the country 's leftist rebels in an effort to end a decade-long civil war .
A spokesman said the guerrillas would present a cease-fire proposal during the negotiations in Costa Rica that includes constitutional and economic changes .
The State Department said there was a `` possibility '' that some Nicaraguan rebels were selling their U.S.-supplied arms to Salvadoran guerrillas , but insisted it was n't an organized effort .
Separately , Secretary of State Baker complained about a U.N. aide who last week told the Contras to disband as part of a regional peace accord .
Died : Cornel Wilde , 74 , actor and director , in Los Angeles , of leukemia ... .
Danilo Kis , 54 , Yugoslav-born novelist and essayist , Sunday , in Paris , of cancer .
British retail sales volume rose a provisional 0.4 % in September from August and was up 2.2 % from September 1988 , the Department of Trade and Industry said .
For the three months ended in September , retail sales volume was down 0.5 % from the previous three months and up 1.2 % from a year earlier .
Chicago investor William Farley agreed to sell three divisions of Cluett Peabody & Co. for about $ 600 million to Bidermann S.A. , a closely held clothing maker based in Paris .
Shortly after completing the $ 1.56 billion acquisition of West Point-Pepperell Inc. in April , Mr. Farley 's holding company , Farley Inc. , said it was considering the sale of Cluett , a leading shirt maker and one of West Point-Pepperell 's biggest units .
Included in the sale are Cluett units that make men 's shirts under the Arrow name , socks under the Gold Toe name and menswear through the Schoeneman division .
The companies said the agreement is subject to Bidermann 's receipt of financing and to regulatory and other approvals .
They said the sale is expected to be concluded by the end of November .
Mr. Farley said the sale of three of Cluett 's four main divisions plus other `` anticipated '' West Point-Pepperell asset sales by December , should bring in a total of about $ 700 million .
He did n't elaborate on other asset sales being considered .
Mr. Farley followed a similar pattern when he acquired Northwest Industries Inc. and then sold much of its assets .
But he kept Fruit of the Loom Inc. , the underwear maker that he still controls and serves as chairman and chief executive .
Cluett was an independent company until West Point-Pepperell acquired it for $ 375 million in cash and stock in 1986 .
In the fiscal year ended Sept. 30 , 1988 , Cluett had operating profit of $ 37 million on sales of $ 757 million .
Bidermann sells clothes under various labels , including Yves Saint Laurent and Bill Robinson for men and Ralph Lauren for women .
A spokesman said the company had sales of $ 400 million in 1988 .
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading , West Point-Pepperell fell 25 cents to $ 53.875 .
Britain 's Blue Arrow PLC intends to change its name to Manpower PLC and write off a chunk of the nearly $ 1.2 billion in good will realized in the takeover of U.S.-based Manpower Inc .
Blue Arrow Chairman Mitchell Fromstein said in an interview that the two steps may be a prelude to reincorporating the world 's biggest employment-services group in the U.S. .
Mr. Fromstein disclosed the planned steps , expected within a few months , as Blue Arrow posted a 2.5 % drop in its third-quarter pretax earnings .
The name change and good will write-off could help solidify Blue Arrow 's dominance of the U.S. temporary-help market and give it a more American image as U.S. investors turn jittery about foreign stocks after Friday 's market plunge .
U.S. holders now own more than 60 % of Blue Arrow compared with 9 % last January .
`` In the U.S. market , the recognition of the Manpower name is infinitely stronger than Blue Arrow , '' Mr. Fromstein said .
The moves also could erase shareholders ' perception of Blue Arrow as a company in turmoil .
`` It further reinforces the concept that Blue Arrow is a thing of the past , '' said Doug Arthur , an analyst at Kidder Peabody & Co. in New York .
The proposed changes `` all make a lot of sense to me , '' he added .
In a widely publicized boardroom coup , Mr. Fromstein ousted Antony Berry as Blue Arrow chief executive in January , a month after Mr. Berry had forced Mr. Fromstein out as the $ 1 million-a-year chief of Milwaukee-based Manpower .
Mr. Fromstein solidified his control in April by taking over from Mr. Berry as chairman .
But the Blue Arrow tumult is n't over yet , as the British government is investigating a disputed # 25 million ( $ 39.4 million ) loan which Mr. Fromstein has said was made under Mr. Berry 's direction .
Blue Arrow was able to pull off the $ 1.34 billion takeover of Manpower in 1987 largely because different British and American accounting standards produce higher reported earnings for British companies .
Under British rules , Blue Arrow was able to write off at once the $ 1.15 billion in good will arising from the purchase .
As a U.S.-based company , Blue Arrow would have to amortize the good will over as many as 40 years , creating a continuing drag on reported earnings .
Good will is the excess of cost of an acquired firm , operating unit or assets over the current or fair market value of those assets .
But with so many shares now held in the U.S. , Blue Arrow reports its earnings two ways , based on both U.K. and U.S. accounting standards .
`` Our balance sheets look like they came from Alice 's wonderland , '' Mr. Fromstein said .
The British version shows `` a handful of pounds of net worth '' following the 1987 write-off of good will , while the American version reflects `` $ 1 billion of net worth because almost none of { the good will } has been written off . ''
Mr. Fromstein said he hopes to eradicate some of the good will left on Blue Arrow 's U.S. books in one fell swoop , but would n't specify how much .
People close to Blue Arrow suggested the write-down would represent a sizable chunk , with executives claiming prior management overstated the extent of Manpower 's good will .
That move , along with the return to the Manpower name , could bolster the company 's prospects during possibly difficult times for temporary help .
The number of U.S. temporary workers fell about 1 % in the 12 months ending Aug. 31 , after sliding nearly 3.5 % in July , said Kidder Peabody 's Mr. Arthur .
Blue Arrow blamed the pretax profit drop in the quarter ended July 31 partly on slower earnings growth of non-Manpower units in Britain .
Overall , pretax profit slid to # 18.49 million in the quarter from # 18.98 million a year earlier .
Richard G. Sim , the man credited with transforming Applied Power Inc. from an underachiever into a feisty player in the global market for hydraulic tools , hopes to guide a similar turnaround at the company 's latest acquisition , Barry Wright Corp .
The 45-year-old former General Electric Co. executive figures it will be easier this time .
But analysts , while applauding the acquisition , say Applied 's chief executive faces a tough challenge in integrating the two companies .
Barry Wright , acquired by Applied for $ 147 million , makes computer-room equipment and vibration-control systems .
The Watertown , Mass. , company 's sales have been dormant and its profits have dropped .
Last year 's earnings of $ 1.3 million , including $ 815,000 from a restructuring gain , were far below the year-earlier $ 8.4 million .
Besides spurring Barry Wright 's sales , which were $ 201.7 million in 1988 , Mr. Sim must pare its costs and product line .
`` The question is how long it 's going to take Barry Wright to make a contribution , '' says F. John Mirek , an analyst at Blunt Ellis Loewi in Milwaukee .
The answer will help determine whether Applied continues to reach the ambitious goals set by Mr. Sim .
The Butler , Wis. , manufacturer went public at $ 15.75 a share in August 1987 , and Mr. Sim 's goal then was a $ 29 per-share price by 1992 .
Strong earnings growth helped achieve that price far ahead of schedule , in August 1988 .
The stock has since softened , trading around $ 25 a share last week and closing yesterday at $ 23.00 in national over-the-counter trading .
But Mr. Sim has set a fresh target of $ 50 a share by the end of
Reaching that goal , says Robert T. Foote , Applied 's chief financial officer , will require `` efficient reinvestment '' of cash by Applied and continuation of its healthy 19 % rate of return on operating capital .
In Barry Wright , Mr. Sim sees a situation `` very similar '' to the one he faced when he joined Applied as president and chief operating officer in 1985 .
Applied , then a closely held company , was stagnating under the management of its controlling family .
While profitable , it `` was n't growing and was n't providing a satisfactory return on invested capital , '' he says .
Mr. Sim is confident that the drive to dominate certain niche markets will work at Barry Wright as it has at Applied .
He also professes an `` evangelical '' fervor to develop a corporate culture that rewards managers who produce and where decision-making is shared .
Mr. Sim considers the new unit 's operations `` fundamentally sound '' and adds that Barry Wright has been fairly successful in moving into markets that have n't interested larger competitors .
`` With a little patience , these businesses will perform very satisfactorily , '' Mr. Sim says .
Within about six months , `` things will be moving in the right direction , '' he predicts .
Mr. Sim figures it will be easier to turn Barry Wright around since he 's now in the driver 's seat .
When he came to Applied , `` I did n't have the power to execute as I do today , '' he says .
He was named chief executive officer of Applied in 1986 and became chairman last November .
At Applied , Mr. Sim set growth as his first objective .
He took the company public in an offering that netted Applied about $ 12.6 million , which helped launch the company 's acquisition program .
Sales climbed to an estimated $ 245 million in fiscal 1989 , ended Aug. 31 , from $ 99.9 million in fiscal 1985 .
The company expects that earnings , which have marched steadily upward in recent years , reached about $ 20.8 million , or $ 1.58 a share , in the fiscal year just ended , up from $ 15.2 million in fiscal 1988 and $ 3.9 million in 1985 .
